.. _simple-smart-contract:

***********************
A Simple Smart Contract
***********************

Let us begin with a basic example that sets the value of a variable and exposes
it for other contracts to access. It is fine if you do not understand
everything right now, we will go into more detail later.

Storage
=======

::

    pragma solidity >=0.4.0 <0.6.0;

    contract SimpleStorage {
        uint storedData;

        function set(uint x) public {
            storedData = x;
        }

        function get() public view returns (uint) {
            return storedData;
        }
    }

The first line simply tells that the source code is written for
Solidity version 0.4.0 or anything newer that does not break functionality
(up to, but not including, version 0.6.0). This is to ensure that the
contract is not compilable with a new (breaking) compiler version, where it could behave differently.
So-called pragmas are common instructions for compilers about how to treat the
source code (e.g. `pragma once <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pragma_once>`_).

A contract in the sense of Solidity is a collection of code (its *functions*) and
data (its *state*) that resides at a specific address on the Ethereum
blockchain. The line ``uint storedData;`` declares a state variable called ``storedData`` of
type ``uint`` (*u*\nsigned *int*\eger of *256* bits). You can think of it as a single slot
in a database that can be queried and altered by calling functions of the
code that manages the database. In the case of Ethereum, this is always the owning
contract. And in this case, the functions ``set`` and ``get`` can be used to modify
or retrieve the value of the variable.

To access a state variable, you do not need the prefix ``this.`` as is common in
other languages.

This contract does not do much yet apart from (due to the infrastructure
built by Ethereum) allowing anyone to store a single number that is accessible by
anyone in the world without a (feasible) way to prevent you from publishing
this number. Of course, anyone could just call ``set`` again with a different value
and overwrite your number, but the number will still be stored in the history
of the blockchain. Later, we will see how you can impose access restrictions
so that only you can alter the number.

.. note::
    All identifiers (contract names, function names and variable names) are restricted to
    the ASCII character set. It is possible to store UTF-8 encoded data in string variables.

.. warning::
    Be careful with using Unicode text, as similar looking (or even identical) characters can
    have different code points and as such will be encoded as a different byte array.

.. index:: ! subcurrency

Subcurrency Example
===================

The following contract will implement the simplest form of a
cryptocurrency. It is possible to generate coins out of thin air, but
only the person that created the contract will be able to do that (it is easy
to implement a different issuance scheme).
Furthermore, anyone can send coins to each other without a need for
registering with username and password — all you need is an Ethereum keypair.


::

    pragma solidity >0.4.99 <0.6.0;

    contract Coin {
        // The keyword "public" makes those variables
        // easily readable from outside.
        address public minter;
        mapping (address => uint) public balances;

        // Events allow light clients to react to
        // changes efficiently.
        event Sent(address from, address to, uint amount);

        // This is the constructor whose code is
        // run only when the contract is created.
        constructor() public {
            minter = msg.sender;
        }

        function mint(address receiver, uint amount) public {
            require(msg.sender == minter);
            require(amount < 1e60);
            balances[receiver] += amount;
        }

        function send(address receiver, uint amount) public {
            require(amount <= balances[msg.sender], "Insufficient balance.");
            balances[msg.sender] -= amount;
            balances[receiver] += amount;
            emit Sent(msg.sender, receiver, amount);
        }
    }

This contract introduces some new concepts, let us go through them one by one.

The line ``address public minter;`` declares a state variable of type address
that is publicly accessible. The ``address`` type is a 160-bit value
that does not allow any arithmetic operations. It is suitable for
storing addresses of contracts or of keypairs belonging to external
persons. The keyword ``public`` automatically generates a function that
allows you to access the current value of the state variable
from outside of the contract.
Without this keyword, other contracts have no way to access the variable.
The code of the function generated by the compiler is roughly equivalent
to the following (ignore ``external`` and ``view`` for now)::

    function minter() external view returns (address) { return minter; }

Of course, adding a function exactly like that will not work
because we would have a
function and a state variable with the same name, but hopefully, you
get the idea - the compiler figures that out for you.

.. index:: mapping

The next line, ``mapping (address => uint) public balances;`` also
creates a public state variable, but it is a more complex datatype.
The type maps addresses to unsigned integers.
Mappings can be seen as `hash tables <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_table>`_ which are
virtually initialized such that every possible key exists from the start and is mapped to a
value whose byte-representation is all zeros. This analogy does not go
too far, though, as it is neither possible to obtain a list of all keys of
a mapping, nor a list of all values. So either keep in mind (or
better, keep a list or use a more advanced data type) what you
added to the mapping or use it in a context where this is not needed.
The :ref:`getter function<getter-functions>` created by the ``public`` keyword
is a bit more complex in this case. It roughly looks like the
following::

    function balances(address _account) external view returns (uint) {
        return balances[_account];
    }

As you see, you can use this function to easily query the balance of a
single account.

.. index:: event

The line ``event Sent(address from, address to, uint amount);`` declares
a so-called "event" which is emitted in the last line of the function
``send``. User interfaces (as well as server applications of course) can
listen for those events being emitted on the blockchain without much
cost. As soon as it is emitted, the listener will also receive the
arguments ``from``, ``to`` and ``amount``, which makes it easy to track
transactions. In order to listen for this event, you would use the following
JavaScript code (which assumes that ``Coin`` is a contract object created via
web3.js or a similar module)::

    Coin.Sent().watch({}, '', function(error, result) {
        if (!error) {
            console.log("Coin transfer: " + result.args.amount +
                " coins were sent from " + result.args.from +
                " to " + result.args.to + ".");
            console.log("Balances now:\n" +
                "Sender: " + Coin.balances.call(result.args.from) +
                "Receiver: " + Coin.balances.call(result.args.to));
        }
    })

Note how the automatically generated function ``balances`` is called from
the user interface.

.. index:: coin

The constructor is a special function which is run during creation of the contract and
cannot be called afterwards. It permanently stores the address of the person creating the
contract: ``msg`` (together with ``tx`` and ``block``) is a special global variable that
contains some properties which allow access to the blockchain. ``msg.sender`` is
always the address where the current (external) function call came from.

Finally, the functions that will actually end up with the contract and can be called
by users and contracts alike are ``mint`` and ``send``.
If ``mint`` is called by anyone except the account that created the contract,
nothing will happen. This is ensured by the special function ``require`` which
causes all changes to be reverted if its argument evaluates to false.
The second call to ``require`` ensures that there will not be too many coins,
which could cause overflow errors later.

On the other hand, ``send`` can be used by anyone (who already
has some of these coins) to send coins to anyone else. If you do not have
enough coins to send, the ``require`` call will fail and also provide the
user with an appropriate error message string.

.. note::
    If you use
    this contract to send coins to an address, you will not see anything when you
    look at that address on a blockchain explorer, because the fact that you sent
    coins and the changed balances are only stored in the data storage of this
    particular coin contract. By the use of events it is relatively easy to create
    a "blockchain explorer" that tracks transactions and balances of your new coin,
    but you have to inspect the coin contract address and not the addresses of the
    coin owners.
